Blazor lifecycle topic (#15841)
aspnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/blazor/lifecycle.md

---
title: ASP.NET Core Blazor lifecycle
author: guardrex
description: Learn how to use Razor component lifecycle methods in ASP.NET Core Blazor apps.
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-3.0'
ms.author: riande
ms.custom: mvc
ms.date: 11/23/2019
no-loc: [Blazor]
uid: blazor/lifecycle
---
# ASP.NET Core Blazor lifecycle

By [Luke Latham](https://github.com/guardrex) and [Daniel Roth](https://github.com/danroth27)

> The Blazor framework includes synchronous and asynchronous lifecycle methods. Override lifecycle methods to perform additional operations on components during component initialization and rendering.

Reviewer: Instead of focusing purely on the lifecycle events I think we want this article to explain more broadly how components work, like how and when the render. We should walk the user through a day in the life a component in a Blazor app. The lifecycle events are then just specific points that you can plugin your specific behaviors. 

Things that I think should be covered:
- What happens during the initial render of the app
  - We probably need to address prerendering as part of this
- When components get instantiated
- When services get injected from DI
- What happens when a parent/root component gets rendered
- When do components render after the initial render
  - In response to UI events and explicit calls to StateHasChanged
- How long do components life for? When do they get disposed?

Author: ... and cross-ref to Steve's original concepts, which include additional ideas for this topic ...

https://github.com/aspnet/AspNetCore.Docs/issues/14353

... and note that the idea here (this PR) was just to set up the new topic and then Steve would come in (or one of the other engineers) and modify the content from there.

Reviewer: Ah ok, that's cool then.

> ### Component initialization methods

Reviewer: Is it deliberate that these aren't top level headings? Currently these headings don't show up in the summary view.

Author: Ah :eye: thanks ... I accidentally killed a heading for these when I was deleting a paragraph: There should be a *Lifecycle methods* H2 here to cover these H3s. I'll add that H2 back.

For a synchronous operation, use `OnInitialized`:

```csharp
protected override void OnInitialized()
{
    ...
}
```

### Before parameters are set

<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase.SetParametersAsync*> sets parameters supplied by the component's parent in the render tree:

```csharp
public override async Task SetParametersAsync(ParameterView parameters)
{
    await ...

    await base.SetParametersAsync(parameters);
}
```

<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ParameterView> contains the entire set of parameter values each time `SetParametersAsync` is called.

The default implementation of `SetParametersAsync` sets the value of each property decorated with the `[Parameter]` or `[CascadingParameter]` attribute that has a corresponding value in the `ParameterView`. Parameters that don't have a corresponding value in `ParameterView` are left unchanged.

If `base.SetParametersAync` isn't invoked, the custom code can interpret the incoming parameters value in any way required. For example, there's no requirement to assign the incoming parameters to the properties on the class.

### After parameters are set

> <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase.OnParametersSetAsync*> and <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase.OnParametersSet*> are called when a component has received parameters from its parent and the values are assigned to properties. These methods are executed after component initialization and each time the parent component is rendered:

Reviewer: The child component might not get rendered if the parameter values haven't changed.

```suggestion
<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase.OnParametersSetAsync*> and <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase.OnParametersSet*> are called when a component has received parameters from its parent and the values are assigned to properties. These methods are executed after component initialization and each time new parameter values are specified:
```

* Is set to `true` the first time that the component instance is invoked.
* Ensures that initialization work is only performed once.

```csharp
protected override async Task OnAfterRenderAsync(bool firstRender)
{
    if (firstRender)
    {
        await ...
    }
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> Asynchronous work immediately after rendering must occur during the `OnAfterRenderAsync` lifecycle event.
>
> A component doesn't rerender after the completion of any returned <xref:System.Threading.Tasks.Task>. Infinite render loops are avoided.

```csharp
protected override void OnAfterRender(bool firstRender)
{
    if (firstRender)
    {
        ...
    }
}
```

`OnAfterRender` *isn't called when prerendering on the server.*

### Suppress UI refreshing

Override <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase.ShouldRender*> to suppress UI refreshing. If the implementation returns `true`, the UI is refreshed:

```csharp
protected override bool ShouldRender()
{
    var renderUI = true;

    return renderUI;
}
```

`ShouldRender` is called each time the component is rendered.

Even if `ShouldRender` is overridden, the component is always initially rendered.

> ## State changes

Reviewer: I think this section would fit in better with a broader description of how and when components get rendered. Right now this section on StateHasChanged feels a bit out of context.

Author: ... another option is to move it to the *State Management* topic. It's used in an example over there but not discussed.

```csharp
protected override async Task OnParametersSetAsync()
{
    await ...
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> Asynchronous work when applying parameters and property values must occur during the `OnParametersSetAsync` lifecycle event.

```csharp
protected override void OnParametersSet()
{
    ...
}
```

### After component render

<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase.OnAfterRenderAsync*> and <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.ComponentBase.OnAfterRender*> are called after a component has finished rendering. Element and component references are populated at this point. Use this stage to perform additional initialization steps using the rendered content, such as activating third-party JavaScript libraries that operate on the rendered DOM elements.

The `firstRender` parameter for `OnAfterRenderAsync` and `OnAfterRender`:

> * Is set to `true` the first time that the component instance is invoked.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Is set to `true` the first time that the component instance is rendered.
```

> * Ensures that initialization work is only performed once.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Can be used to ensure that initialization work is only performed once.
```

```csharp
protected override async Task OnAfterRenderAsync(bool firstRender)
{
    if (firstRender)
    {
        await ...
    }
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> Asynchronous work immediately after rendering must occur during the `OnAfterRenderAsync` lifecycle event.
>

> > A component doesn't rerender after the completion of any returned <xref:System.Threading.Tasks.Task>. Infinite render loops are avoided.

Reviewer 2: I know you have a rule that things have to be phrased like this, but it's nearly impossible to understand. It's so ambiguous.

```suggestion
> Even if you return a <xref:System.Threading.Tasks.Task> from `OnAfterRenderAsync`, the framework will not schedule a further render cycle for your component once that task completes. This is to avoid an infinite render loop. It's different from the other lifecycle methods, which do schedule a further render cycle once the returned task completes.
```

Author: It's cool ... I'll just change the future tense.

```csharp
protected override void OnAfterRender(bool firstRender)
{
    if (firstRender)
    {
        ...
    }
}
```

> `OnAfterRender` *isn't called when prerendering on the server.*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`OnAfterRender` and `OnAfterRenderAsync` *are not called when prerendering on the server.*
```
